---
layout: post
title:  "My 2018: A year-in-review"
date:   2018-12-18
categories: learning
---
Traditionally we look back at the past year around these times before jumping
into new challenges after the new year. In this article I want to highlight the
things that have added most value for me this past year and hopefully it
contains some good resources and nuggets of inspiration to all who are reading
this. I share not only my biggest accomplishments, but also my favorite MOOC's,
books and podcasts that I've familiarized with this year.

## Master's degree

In spring I was finally able to finish my master's degree in technology based
management. I wrote my final thesis about learning organizations. Learning
organizations is a topic that is crucial in today's society where everyone is
struggling to keep up with the ever increasing pace of requirements and
changes. I found many similarities learning organizations and companies using
lean or agile methodologies. My key takeaway from the master's degree as a
whole, was that all courses included writing a paper and reflecting the course
topic on my own workplace. It has helped better understand the organization
that I work for.

## MOOC's

![1545076348069](/assets/images/2018-12-18-year-in-review/1545076348069.png)

In autumn 2017 I had gotten more interested in the world of data science, but
my master's studies were taking all of my spare time. When I finally graduated
I went on a MOOC spree! In 2019 I will most probably slow down with the MOOC's
and start to focus on more end-to-end project(s) so that I learn to apply the
learned skills in practice. Here's a list of my favorite courses that I took
this year:

**[Data Analysis with
Pandas](https://www.udemy.com/data-analysis-with-pandas/)** by Boris Pashkaver
provided a comprehensive course on handling data with the Pandas Python
library. It has been of tremendous help both at work as well as helped me work
more efficiently with other online courses.

**[Machine Learning](https://www.coursera.org/learn/machine-learning)** by
Andrew Ng helped me realize that there is not magic but mathematics behind
machine learning. :) Although I don't remember all the formulas and intuitions
by heart, it prepared me for learning to apply machine learning in practice.

**[Machine Learning A-Z](https://www.udemy.com/machinelearning/)** and **[Deep
Learning A-Z](https://www.udemy.com/deeplearning/)** by Kirill Eremenko and
Hadelin de Ponteves served as an excellent overview of several algorithms,
their intuition, their use cases, and how to apply them in practice. These work
as a good reference/starting point for me when I want to use an algorithm in
practice.

**[Python for Data Science and Machine Learning
Bootcamp](https://www.udemy.com/python-for-data-science-and-machine-learning-bootcamp/)**
by Jose Portilla felt like the most polished course of all that I've taken. I
really liked Jose's emphasis on exploratory data analysis and home work
assignments with related notebooks. Content-wise it was a bit overlapping with
the courses from Kirill and Hadelin (although I took this course first).

## Books

For the third consecutive year I've participated in the Goodreads reading
challenge. As the year is coming to an end I'm barely exceeding my target for
this year, which is 40 books. Here are the books that I read this year, which I
rated 5/5 stars. :star::star::star::star::star:

**[Born a Crime](https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/29780253-born-a-crime)**
by Trevor Noah. This is an incredible story of a mixed colored boy's childhood
in the middle of  apartheid South Africa. A story about a boy who is trying to
find his place and community in a family filled with violence, abuse,
discipline but in the end also unconditional love. A story filled with action,
humor, joy, grief and tragedy. A story about Trevor Noah growing up.

**[The Goal](https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/113934.The_Goal)**
by Eliyahu M. Goldratt is a novel about Alex Rogo who is about to lose his job
as a plant manager. He's not doing much better with his family either because
of the long days at work to save the plant. This, until he meets his friend
from the past who, by coaching, starts introducing him into the theory of
constraints. Will he be able to save the plant? An honorable mention goes to
Vasco Duarte and his [book](https://oikosofyseries.com/no-estimates-book-order)
about #NoEstimates. In a similar manner, by using a fictional story, he
presents how to succeed with software projects by defining and splitting the
work into small similarly sized stories and features. using active scope
management and relying on forecasts rather than project estimates.

**[Factfulness](https://www.gapminder.org/factfulness-book/)** by Hans Rosling
presents ten instincts that might distort our perspective of how we see the
world. It teaches the reader to rely on data but to be critical on how it is
presented. At the same time the book shows us some facts about the world where
even the smartest people have been proven to know less than monkeys (=random
answer). For those of you who speak Swedish, I recommend reading his memoir
"Hur jag lärde mig förstå världen". The books conveys the same message through
incredible stories that Hans (and his family) got to experience throughout his
entire life.

**[Deep Learning with Python](https://www.manning.com/books/deep-learning-with-python)**
by Francois Chollet introduces you to deep learning using the Keras library.
The book is well written, the intuition is easy to understand and the code
examples are elegant. In case you're just learning Keras  or want to learn a
few more advanced tricks, I recommend grabbing this book and giving it a read.

## Podcasts

For the past years I've mostly preferred listening to podcasts instead of
listening to music. Here's a list of a few great podcasts that I've found this
year.

**[Artificial Intelligence](https://lexfridman.com/ai/)** by Lex Fridman. I
find this podcast highly interesting not only because of the topics, but also
because of the great high profile guests he has had on the show and interviewed.

**[SuperDataScience](https://www.superdatascience.com/podcast/)** by Kirill
Eremenko. I like Kirill's podcast because to the interviews and the real life
examples how data science is utilized in various fields of work. In addition,
it is a great source of interesting people in the field of data science to
follow and/or connect with.

**[Boss Level Podcast](http://www.bosslevelpodcast.com/)** by Sami Honkonen.
I'll let his podcast subtitle speak for itself: *"Interviews with interesting
people doing awesome things"*. Topics often relate to leadership,
organizations, agile and so on giving me good insights and ideas for work.

**[Let's Know Things](https://letsknowthings.com/)** by Colin Wright is
probably my favorite podcast when I want to unwind and just set my thoughts
elsewhere. For each episode he chooses a new topic from a varying range of
alternatives and shares his thoughts/studies around that topic in little less
than an hour. The podcast teaches me new things about topics that I never
would've though of looking into otherwise!

## Writing

A good way to strengthen your understanding of a certain topic is to write
about it. As a result, I thought that I would challenge myself and start
writing articles here on LinkedIn and on Medium. This was a huge step for me as
I've been very cautious about putting myself on display because I felt afraid
of what people would think of me and my texts. A couple of articles later I'm
happy that I started writing. I get to share topics that I find interesting!
The highlight thus far is my article on [using Python in Power
BI](https://towardsdatascience.com/using-python-in-power-bi-ee95a6b71443) that
has reached almost 10000 people in total. With the same blog post I was
accepted as a contributor for [Towards Data Science](https://towardsdatascience.com/).

## Next

Now it is time to slow down for the holidays and spend some with the family and
friends. I look forward to a new year and continued networking, sharing and
writing of interesting stuff here on LinkedIn. There is an abundance of
interesting topics to learn. See you on the other side!

